# BE80: Backend extension specification

| name                       | BE80               |
|----------------------------|--------------------|
| version                    | 0.1.1(preview)     |
| status                     | proposal           |
| authors                    | Tom Harley (trh)   |
| serving component(s)       | backend            |
| consuming component(s)     | all                |
| basic spec                 | no                 |
| can be required by servers | no                 |
| can be required by clients | yes                |

The key words "**MUST**", "**MUST NOT**", "**REQUIRED**", "**SHALL**", "**SHALL NOT**", "**SHOULD**", "**SHOULD NOT**", "**RECOMMENDED**", "**MAY**", and "**OPTIONAL**" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt).

## Changelog
### Version 0.1

- First draft

## Dependency

This protocol relies on [Protocol BE01](BE01.md), in particular [the section on views](BE01.md#views).

## The `"tree"` View

An additional view, `"tree"`, is defined as follows:

Basic metadata (similar to that provided by [the `"meta"` view](BE01.md#meta-view) will be provided for the selected file. Like the `"meta"` view, files with child files will include basic metadata for these files also. Unlike the `"meta"` view, this generation of child file information is recursive.

### Mention in `supported_views`

For files for which the `"tree"` view is available, the unwrapped response for a `"meta"` view **MUST** match
```javascript
{
    "supported_views": {
        "tree": {
            "max_depth": optional(integer)
        }
    }
}
```
Where `"max_recursion"` represents the maximum number of times the provider is willing to recursively use the `"tree"` view, and therefore also the maximum nested depth of `"tree"` views in responses provided by this provider. A provider that includes a `"max_depth"` value here **SHOULD** keep this value constant between different files, and **MUST NOT** exceed the `"max_depth"` value of a file's `"meta"` view in a `"tree"` view response for that file.

The stated `"max_depth"` **SHOULD NOT** include the base file: for example, a `"max_depth"` of `1` indicates that the provider **MAY** include the child files of the base file in a `"tree"` view response, but **MUST NOT** include any of those files' child files.

Implementors of this Protocol **MUST** provide the `"tree"` view for files of type `"directory"`.

### The `"tree"` View Response

The named response content `treeblock` is defined as matching
```javascript
{
    "file_name": string,
    "child files": optional(array(treeblock))
}
```

The unwrapped response for a `"tree"` view on a file **MUST** match
```javascript
{
    "depth_restricted": optional(boolean),
    "tree": treeblock
}
```
`"depth_restricted"` **MUST** be present and equal to `true` if the response provider has stopped adding `treeblock`s to the response recursively, even though more could be added for additional files. A provider **MAY** stop nesting `treeblock`s at any depth, and **MAY** nest some recursive `treeblock`s deeper than others. If a file's `"meta"` view response would contain a `"max_depth"` value, a `"tree"` view response for that file **MUST NOT** nest `treeblock`s deeper than the specified value.

### Additional `"tree"` Query Parameters

#### Nested `treeblock` Depth

A requested recursive depth may be specified by setting the query parameter `tree_depth=<requested_depth>`. A `requested_depth` **MAY** be greater than the `max_depth` as specified for a file in its `"meta"` view. However, the responder **MUST NOT** exceed the depth specified by this `max_depth` value.

#### File Types

If the query parameter `tree_types` is included in the reqest, the `treeblock`s in the response **MUST** additionally match
```javascript
{
    "type": string
}
```
where `"type"` is as described [in Protocol BE01](BE01.md#meta-view).

#### File IDs

If the query parameter `tree_ids` is included in the request, the `treeblock`s in the response **MUST** additionally match
```javascript
{
    "id": string
}
```
where `"id"` is as described [in Protocol BE01](BE01.md#meta-view).

#### File Metadata

If the query parameter `tree_metadata` is included in the request, the `treeblock`s in the response **MUST** additionally match
```javascript
{
    "metadata": metadata
}
```
where `"metadata"` is as described [in Protocol BE01](BE01.md#meta-view).

#### File Status

If the query parameter `tree_statuses` is included in the request, the `treeblock`s in the response **MUST** additionally match
```javascript
{
    "status": string
}
```
where `"status"` is as described [in Protocol BE01](BE01.md#meta-view).
