# BE90: Backend extension specification

| name                       | BE90               |
|----------------------------|--------------------|
| version                    | 0.1                |
| authors                    | Tom Harley (trh)   |
| serving component(s)       | backend            |
| consuming component(s)     | all                |
| basic spec                 | no                 |
| can be required by servers | no                 |
| can be required by clients | no                 |

The key words "**MUST**", "**MUST NOT**", "**REQUIRED**", "**SHALL**", "**SHALL NOT**", "**SHOULD**", "**SHOULD NOT**", "**RECOMMENDED**", "**MAY**", and "**OPTIONAL**" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt).

## Changelog
### Version 0.1

- First draft

## Dependency

This protocol relies on [Protocol BE01](BE01.md), in particular [the section on views](BE01.md#views).

## The `"share"` View

An additional view, `"share"`, is defined as follows:

A response for a request of a file's `"share"` view will contain a _share key_: a value that can be used by an unauthorised client to interact with the file. The particular interactions this user can have with the file are specified at provision of the share key.

### Mention in `"supported_views"`

For files for which the `"share"` view is available, the unwrapped response for a `"meta"` view **MUST** match
```javascript
{
    "supported_views": {
        "share": {
            "max_lifetime": optional(integer),
            "default_view": string
        }
    }
}
```
where `"max_lifetime"` is the maximum feasible _lifetime_ for a share key produced by the providing system, in seconds, for this file (a share key's _lifetime_ is the duration after provision for which use of the share key is supported by the provider), and `"default_view"` is the default view provided by a share key for this file, if no view is specified.

### Requesting a Share Key/Using the `"share"` View

An unwrapped response to a successful request for the `"share"` view of a file that supports it **MUST** match
```javascript
{
    "key": string,
    "expires_in": integer
}
```
where `"key"` contains the share key and `"expires_in"` contains the lifetime of the provided share key.

A provider **MAY** provide a share key that has been provided previously for another request, even if the share key is still valid. However, the share key **MUST** satisfy exactly all additional query parameters in the request responded to. The properties of a share key, including its lifetime, **MUST NOT** be altered while the share key is valid.

### Additional `"tree"` Query Parameters

#### Minimum Share Key Lifetime

A minimum share key lifetime may be specified by setting the query parameter `share_minimum=<minimum_lifetime>`. A requested minimum lifetime **MAY** be greater than the `max_lifetime` as specified for a file in its `"meta"` view.

A provider **SHOULD** either provide a share key, or respond with an error, with error code `400` and message `lifetime_limit` (in the case that the provider is unable to procure a share key with the requested lifetime). If a share key is provided, its lifetime **MUST** be of a duration of at least that specified in the given `minimum_lifetime`.

#### Share Key View

The view to be used when using the share key may be specified by setting the query parameter `share_view=<desired_view>`. If this parameter is absent, a default view dependent on the `"default_view"` value of the `"meta"` view of the file is used.

### Using Share Keys

A successful `GET` request to the URL
```
http://backend.endpoint/share/<share_key>
```
(where `share_key` is a share key within its lifetime) **MUST** be responded to with a response matching that of the appropriate view, found in [the views section of BE01](BE01.md#views), for the file specified at share key provision.

`GET` requests to URLs of this format do not require authorisation.
