# ML01: Machine learning basic specification
**THIS IS A DRAFT SPECFICATION AND IS NOT FINAL**

| name                       | ML01               |
|----------------------------|--------------------|
| version                    | 0.1.0              |
| status                     | proposal           |
| author                     | Ryan Wilson (rw86) |
| serving component(s)       | Machine Learning   |
| consuming component(s)     | HCI                |
| basic spec                 | yes                |
| can be required by servers | no                 |
| can be required by clients | HCI                |

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

## License
The content of this file is free to edit and distribute,
under the following conditions:
1. Names listed under the _author_ field in this file **MUST NOT** be removed
(but **MAY** be added to).
2. If any part of the content of this file is functionally altered, the
resulting file **MUST** be renamed.
3. This license must be distributed as part of the new file.

## Changelog
### Version 0.1

- First draft

# Foreword: Acknowledgements

This specification is loosely based on ideas presented in an endpoint outline "ml_endpoints.md" written by Daphne Bogosian. There are some major architectural differences, outlined below:

- The principal "backend should be responsible for all matters of persistance" agreed during protocol meetings has been incorporated
  - In particular results are returned to the frontend as files via backend (this was also agreeed)
- The principal "HCI should talk directly to backend" has been incorporated.
  - In particular there is no BE <-> ML communication.
- The API has been generalised to not specifically reference training/models and instead refence the more general "jobs":
  - Gives more flexibility to the implementation for data processing tasks that do not fit this pattern.
  - Removes burden on client.
  - Jobs referencing models are still posibile (see implementation notes)
- Response format made consistent with BE01.
- Spec now only uses GET and POST, as these are the request types with most widely available browser support.
  - This allows the front end to not require a server component (this was a principle agreed during meetings).

# Foreword: Required Reading

The reader is assumed to be fully familiar with the contents of BE01.

Reference is also made to the bundle files and report format of UI01.

# Foreword: URL

Within this document the URL `http://ml.endpoint/` will be used to indicate the base URL of the backend server's API endpoint.

# Foreword: Matching notation

The matching notation used in this specification is identical to that used in BE01.

# Overview

The server provides the ability to run data processing "jobs". These jobs can take parameters which the front end should collect from the end-user. The server then allows monitoring of the status of these jobs. The server accesses the backend as a normal client using a provided authentication token. It reads data files from the backend and writes output files back there. Generally the server will write one or more result data files and a single report file into a directory and mark the directory as bundle (opening the report file by default) (see UI01 for details of this).

# Basic Response

The basic reponse is identical to that used in BE01.

# Authentication

The client **MUST** send its authorisation token, as obtained from the OAuth endpoint, in the headers of each request as described in BE01.

The server **SHOULD** verify the token by using it to access the current user details API (or some other authenticated API) on the backend.

If the server cannot verify the identity of the user it **SHOULD** return http status 401 and error "not_authorised".

A possible deviation from the specified behaviour would be for the server to only check token validity when required to access some backend resource. The is **not** recommended and an implementation that does such should ensure that it fully understands and addresses security consequences of doing so.

# Listing Available Jobs

In order to request the data processing tasks that the server is capable of, clients shoud request:

```
http://ml.endpoint/projects/<project_name>/job_types
```

If the given project does not exist the server **SHOULD** return error code 404 and error "project_not_found".

If the user does not have accessed to the project an unauthorised response **SHOULD** be returned. (see above)

If the project exists and the user is authorised the server's unwrapped response **MUST** match

```javascript
array({
    "id": string,
    
    "name": {
        "category": string,
        "group": string,
        "display_name": string,
        "description": string
    },
    
    "parameters" : array(parameter)
})
```

`parameter` is defined as

```javascript
{
    "id": string,
    "required": boolean,
    
    "name": {
        "group": string,
        "display_name": string,
        "description": string
    },
    
    "type": alternative([
        "tabular_file", "image_file", "file", "new_file"
        "string_column", "number_column",
        "column_value"
        "boolean", "integer", "number", "string",
    ])
    
    "filter": optional(string),
    "default_value": optional(alternative([
        integer, string, number, boolean
    ]))
}
```

- The (non-new) file types refers to any existing file. the client **MUST** use the file's id and present it as a string.
- "new_file" refers to a file that does not currently exist. The client **MUST** present this a string representing the full path.
- the column types refer to column indices within a given "tabular_file" (the client **MUST** present the index as an integer starting from 0)
- The column value type refers to some value that appears in some column (this is presented as a string)

The effect of the "filter" attribute is type dependant:

| type                                             | required | interpretation                                                                    |
| ---                                              | ---      | ---                                                                               |
| "tabular_file", "image_file", "file", "new_file" | no       | The file id of a directory that the file should be descended from (possibly through multiple directories)                         |
| "string_column", "number_column"                 | yes      | The parameter id of the "tablular_file" parameter that the column should come from |
| "column_value"                                   | yes      | The parameter id of the column that the value should come from                    |
| other                                            | no       | not valid                                                                         |


The "default_value" **MUST** agree with the the "type" attribute.


# Starting a Job

To start a job a client should POST to

```
http://ml.endpoint/projects/<project_name>/jobs?action=start
```

With request body matching
```javascript
{
    "job_type_id": string,

    "parameters": array({
        "parameter_id": string,
        "value": alternative([
            integer, string, number, boolean
        ])
    }),

    "refresh_token": optional(string),
}
```
"refresh_token" is optional and can be used by the server to support long running jobs whereby there is a non negligible possibility of the access token expiring. The server **MUST** support running jobs without having the refresh token.

If the given project does not exist the server **SHOULD** return error code 404 and error "project_not_found".

If the user does not have accessed to the project an unauthorised response **SHOULD** be returned.

If the given job type does not exist then the server **SHOULD** return error code 404 and error "job_type_not_found".

If a required parameter is not given the server **SHOULD** respond with http response 400 and error "property_missing" and set `"error_data"` to the property's name.

If a non existing parameter was given the server **SHOULD** respond with http response 400 and error "invalid_property" and set `"error_data"` to the property's name.

If a parameter was given with an incorrect value the server **SHOULD** respond with http response 400 and error "invalid_property_value" and set `"error_data"` to the property's name.

Otherwise if the job was succesfully started the server's unwrapped response **MUST** match

```javascript
{
    "job_id": string
}
```

# Getting Job Status

To get the status of a job the client should request

```
http://ml.endpoint/projects/<project_name>/jobs/<job_id>
```

If the given project does not exist the server **SHOULD** return error code 404 and error "project_not_found".

If the user does not have accessed to the project an unauthorised response **SHOULD** be returned.

If the given job does not exist then the server **SHOULD** return error code 404 and error "job_not_found".

otherwise the server's unwrapped response **MUST** match

```javascript
{
    "status": alternative([
        "running", "complete", "failed", "cancelled"
    ]),

    "job_type_id": string,
    "started_by": string,
    
    "messages": optional(array({
        "type": alternative([
            "info", "warning", "error",
        ]),
        "time": string,
        "message": string
    }))

    "started": string,
    "completed": optional(string),
    
    "progress_estimate": optional(number)
}
```

"started_by" give the username of the user who started the job.

"messages" gives log messages output by the job as it ran, time is an ISO 8601 datetime given in UTC.

started and completed are datetimes formatted according to ISO 8601 in UTC. If the job is still in progress it **MUST NOT** have a "completed" attribute. Progress estimate gives a normalised value from 0 to 1 estimating the percentage complete of the job.

# Listing All Jobs

To get the status of all running jobs on a given project the client should
request

```
http://ml.endpoint/projects/<project_name>/jobs
```

If the given project does not exist the server **SHOULD** return error code 404 and error "project_not_found".

If the user does not have accessed to the project an unauthorised response **SHOULD** be returned.

Otherwise the server's unwrapped response **MUST** match
```javascript
array({
    "job_id": string,
    "status": {}
})
```

where "status" gives the object defined above describing the jobs current status.

# Stopping a Job

To stop a job the client should POST to

```
http://ml.endpoint/projects/<project_name>/jobs/<job_id>?action=cancel
```

If the given project does not exist the server **SHOULD** return error code 404 and error "project_not_found".

If the user does not have accessed to the project an unauthorised response **SHOULD** be returned.

If the given job does not exist then the server **SHOULD** return error code 404 and error "job_not_found".

If the job cannot be cancelled because it is not running the server **SHOULD** return error code 400 and error "invalid_job_state".

otherwise the server **MUST** return a successful empty response.

# Deleting a Job.

To delete a job the client should POST to

```
http://ml.endpoint/projects/<project_name>/jobs/<job_id>?action=delete
```

If the given project does not exist the server **SHOULD** return error code 404 and error "project_not_found".

If the user does not have accessed to the project an unauthorised response **SHOULD** be returned.

If the given job does not exist then the server **SHOULD** return error code 404 and error "job_not_found".

otherwise the server **MUST** return a successful empty response.

# Notes for implementors
## State
This specification and BE01 were together written to allow implementations that did not depend on the ML endpoints requiring any storage. As an example of how this may work:

- The server could use its reserved directory inside each project to store its state, for group "ML1" this would be "_reserved/ML1"
- There could be a subdirectory "jobs" that contains a file (whose name is the job id) tracking job details

## Output

For output the following pattern is suggested:

- Each output producing job type should require an output parameter with type "new_file"
- The job will create a results directory at the output path
- Data that should be included is uploaded to this directory as CSV, for example
- A report file (following the spec in UI01) that uses the data files is uploaded to this same directory
- The directory is marked as a bundle (see UI01) and the "main_file" parameter set to the report file.

## Reusing models

If the server wishes to have jobs that reuse models then one possible way of doing this is:

- Each job type that creates a model should have an optional "new_file" parameter to store the model at. (or even just a name for the model and it is stored in some reserved directory)
- Each job type that requires a model should have an required parameter to retrieve the model. (again this could just be a name with the file implicitly stored in some reserved directory).
