# ML01: Machine learning basic specification
**THIS IS A DRAFT SPECFICATION AND IS NOT FINAL**

| name                       | ML01               |
|----------------------------|--------------------|
| version                    | 0.1.1(pre-release) |
| status                     | proposal           |
| author                     | Ryan Wilson (rw86) |
|                            | Daphne Bogosian    |
| serving component(s)       | Machine Learning   |
| consuming component(s)     | HCI                |
| basic spec                 | yes                |
| can be required by servers | no                 |
| can be required by clients | HCI                |


The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

## License
The content of this file is free to edit and distribute,
under the following conditions:
1. Names listed under the _author_ field in this file **MUST NOT** be removed
(but **MAY** be added to).
2. If any part of the content of this file is functionally altered, the
resulting file **MUST** be renamed.
3. This license must be distributed as part of the new file.

## Changelog
### Version 0.1

- First draft

### Version 0.1.1

- Added license.

# Foreword: Acknowledgements

This specification is based on the Swagger protocol found here: https://app.swaggerhub.com/apis/JH-Project/machine-learning-api/1.1. *PLEASE NOTE THE VERSION ON SWAGGER IS MORE LIKELY TO BE UP TO DATE THAN THIS DOCUMENT. IF THERE ARE DIFFERENCES, THE SWAGGER DOCUMENT HAS THE HIGHER AUTHORITY.* It was developed in conjunction between Daphne Bogosian and Ryan Wilson.
Some architectural things, outlined below:

- The principal "backend should be responsible for all matters of persistance" agreed during protocol meetings has been incorporated
  - In particular results are returned to the frontend as files via backend (this was also agreeed)
- The principal "HCI should talk directly to backend" has been incorporated.
- Response format made consistent with BE01.

# Foreword: Required Reading

The reader is assumed to be fully familiar with the contents of BE01.

Reference is also made to the bundle files and report format of UI01.

# Foreword: URL

Within this document the URL `http://ml.endpoint/` will be used to indicate the base URL of the backend server's API endpoint.

# Foreword: Matching notation

The matching notation used in this specification is identical to that used in BE01.

# Overview

The server provides the ability to run data processing "jobs". These jobs can take parameters which the front end should collect from the end-user. The server then allows monitoring of the status of these jobs. The server accesses the backend as a normal client using a provided authentication token. It reads data files from the backend and writes output files back there. Generally the server will write one or more result data files and a single report file into a directory and mark the directory as bundle (opening the report file by default) (see UI01 for details of this).

# Basic Response

The basic reponse is identical to that used in BE01.

# Authentication

The client **MUST** send its authorisation token, as obtained from the OAuth endpoint, in the headers of each request as described in BE01.

The server **SHOULD** verify the token by using it to access the current user details API (or some other authenticated API) on the backend.

If the server cannot verify the identity of the user it **SHOULD** return http status 401 and error "not_authorised".

A possible deviation from the specified behaviour would be for the server to only check token validity when required to access some backend resource. The is **not** recommended and an implementation that does such should ensure that it fully understands and addresses security consequences of doing so.

# Listing Available Jobs

In order to request the data processing tasks that the server is capable of, clients shoud request:

```
http://ml.endpoint/jobs
```

The server's unwrapped response **MUST** match

```javascript
"jobs": array({
		"job_id": string,
		"data_type": string
		"algorithm_name": string,
		"partial_training_support": boolean,
		"job_description": string,
		"parameters": array(Parameter)
	})
```

Where Parameter is defined as
```javascript
{
	"id": string,
	"required": boolean,
	"type": alternative(integer, boolean, string, number)
	"description": string
}
```

Data_type describes the type of data this job operates on (e.g. tabular data or images).

# Starting a Job

To start a job a client should POST to

```
http://ml.endpoint/models
```

With request body matching
```javascript
{
	"refresh_token": string,
	"job_id": string,
	"training_data": {
		"id": string,
		"project_name": string
	},
	"output_directory_path": string,
	"input_columns": array(Column)
	"output_columns": array(Column)
	"parameters": object
}
```
where Column is defined as
```javascript
{
	"column_index": integer,
	"column_type": alternative("discrete", "continuous", "date", "imagefilepath")
}
```

"refresh_token" is optional and can be used by the server to support long running jobs whereby there is a non negligible possibility of the access token expiring. The server **MUST** support running jobs without having the refresh token.

The column type "imagefilepath" is in anticipation of image analysis extensions.

If the given project does not exist the server **SHOULD** return error code 404.

If the user does not have access to the project the output is to be saved in, or access to the training data,  an unauthorised response **SHOULD** be returned.

If any of the job id, the training data, the output directory path, the input columns, the output columns, or the required parameter do not exist then the server **SHOULD** return error code 404.

If a non existing parameter was given the server **SHOULD** respond with http response 400.

If a parameter was given with an incorrect value the server **SHOULD** respond with http response 400.

Otherwise if the job was succesfully started the server's unwrapped response **MUST** match

```javascript
{
    "model_id": string
}
```
with http response 201.

# Getting Job Status

To get the status of a job the client should request

```
http://ml.endpoint/models/{project_name}/{model_id}
```

If the given project or model id does not exist the server **SHOULD** return error code 404.

If the user does not have accessed to the project an unauthorised response **SHOULD** be returned.

Otherwise the server's unwrapped response **MUST** match

```javascript
{
    "status": alternative("running", "complete", "failed"),
	"percent_trained": number,
	"description": string,
    "id": string,
    "start_time": string,
	"started_by": string
}
```

"started_by" give the username of the user who started the job.

"description" gives an optional log of the output by the job as it runs.

start_time is a datetime formatted according to ISO 8601 in UTC. If the job is still in progress it **MUST NOT** have a "completed" attribute. percent_trained gives a normalised value from 0 to 1 estimating the percentage complete of the job.

# Listing All Jobs

To get the status of all models stored in a given project the client should
request

```
http://ml.endpoint/models/{project_name}
```

If the given project does not exist the server **SHOULD** return error code 404.

If the user does not have accessed to the project an unauthorised response **SHOULD** be returned.

Otherwise the server's unwrapped response **MUST** match
```javascript
array({
		"percent_trained": 0.3,
		"status": alternative("running", "complete", "failed"),
		"description": "string",
		"job_id": "string"
		"model_id": "string",
		"start_time": "string",
		"started_by": "string"
]})
```

# Delete a Model

To delete a model (either finished or still running) the client should send a DELETE request to

```
http://ml.endpoint/models/{project_name}/{model_id}
```

If the given project or model do not exist the server **SHOULD** return error code 404.

If the user does not have access to the project an unauthorised response **SHOULD** be returned.

Otherwise the server **MUST** return a successful empty response.

# Stopping a partially trainable model

To halt a partially trainable job, the client should send a DELETE request to

```
http://ml.endpoint/models/stop/{project_name}/{model_id}
```

If the given project or model do not exist the server **SHOULD** return error code 404.

If the user does not have accessed to the project an unauthorised response **SHOULD** be returned.

If the model is not partially trainable the server **MUST** return error code 405.

Otherwise the server **MUST** return a successful empty response.

# Getting a predictions from a model

To get predictions from a model the client should send a POST request to

```
http://ml.endpoint/models/prediction/{project_name}/{model_id}
```

with request body matching
```javascript
{
	"data_file": {
		"id": string,
		"project_name": string
	},
	"input_columns": array(Column)
}
```
where Column is defined as
```javascript
{
	"column_index": integer,
	"column_type": alternative("discrete", "continuous", "date", "imagefilepath")
}
```

If the given project or model do not exist the server **SHOULD** return error code 404.

If the user does not have access to the project an unauthorised response **SHOULD** be returned.

Otherwise the server's unwrapped response **MUST** match

```javascript
{
	"result_type": alternative("integer", "boolean", "string", "number"),
	"results": array(array(string))
}	
```
Where the string elements within results must be of the type `result_type`.

# Suggest applicable algorithms

To get applicable algorithms for a given data set, the client should send a POST request to

```
http://ml.endpoint/suggest
```

with request body matching
```javascript
{
	"data_file": {
		"id": string,
		"project_name": string
	},
	"input_columns": array(Column)
	"output_columns": array(Column)
}
```
where Column is defined as in the call above.

If the given data file, input columns, or output columns do not exist the server **SHOULD** return error code  404.

If the user does not have access to the data file an unauthorised response **SHOULD** be returned.

Otherwise the server's unwrapped response **MUST** match

```javascript
{ "jobs": array([
		"job": {
			"job_id": string,
			"data_type": string,
			"algorithm_name": string,
			"partial_training_support": boolean,
			"job_description": string,
			"parameters": array(Parameter)
		},
		"score": number
	])
}
```
The Job object should match the Job object described in the /jobs call.



# Notes for implementors
## State
This specification and BE01 were together written to allow implementations that did not depend on the ML endpoints requiring any storage. As an example of how this may work:

- The server could use its reserved directory inside each project to store its state, for group "ML1" this would be "_reserved/ML1"
- There could be a subdirectory "jobs" that contains a file (whose name is the job id) tracking job details

## Output

For output the following pattern is suggested:

- Each output producing job type should require an output parameter with type "output_file_path"
- The job will create a results directory at the output path
- Data that should be included is uploaded to this directory as CSV, for example
- A report file (following the spec in UI01) that uses the data files is uploaded to this same directory
- The directory is marked as a bundle (see UI01) and the "main_file" parameter set to the report file.

