## A Quick Guide to Using the Autogenerated Swagger Server
Note: I have only dealt with this in Python. Not 100% sure how different it is in other languages.

tl;dr - Don't touch any of the autogenerated files (beyond changing library names to fit your project) *except* the controller files. The controller files have functions which represent the API calls and take Models as parameters and return Models as responses.

To download a client or server, go to the SwaggerHub page (https://app.swaggerhub.com/apis/JH-Project/machine-learning-api/1.1) and click the little downward arrow button in the top right hand corner of the page. You can choose server or client, and then what language you want it in.

The generated code (for the server) will contain classes for each model used in the API. These models are the in-language representations of the JSON objects received as parameters or returned as responses for every single call. These should not be touched or edited. If the API is ever updated, these are also the only parts of the autogenerated code that should be altered. So when the API is updated, all you need to do is download it again, find the file for the particular models that have changed, and copy them into your project. Since you should not have edited these anyway, you will not lose any work. The one change you might make is to ensure that the package/library name is correct. E.g. in Python, the autogenerated server is put in a `swagger_server` directory, and all imports are from `swagger_server.{something}`. However, if you move the code, the directory from which you import will obviously change.

The only part of the generated code that should be edited is the controllers. There is a controller for every type of API call: training, algorithms, and model. Each controller class contains a function for each API call of that type. E.g. Algorithms contains `jobs` and `suggest` functions. The parameters (passed in by the caller) are passed into the function as a parameter. It will be a Model object (e.g. `create_model` takes a CreateDataModel as input). Which model is used as input for each call can be looked up in the documentation on SwaggerHub. Whatever is returned by that function will be the response to the API call. So for calls that have a JSON response, you should create the corresponding Model object, fill in its fields appropriately and return it. None of the other files should need to be altered.

In Python, the response code is defaulted as `200`. To return a different response, your return statement should look something like `return model_object, 404` (the response code is the second element in a tuple you return from the function).
