# UI01: 
**THIS IS A DRAFT SPECFICATION AND IS NOT FINAL**

| name                       | UI01                         |
|----------------------------|------------------------------|
| version                    | 0.1.0                        |
| status                     | proposal                     |
| author                     | Ryan Wilson (rw86)           |
| serving component(s)       | n/a                          |
| consuming component(s)     | hci                          |
| basic spec                 | yes                          |
| can be required by servers | ML (bundle and report files) |
| can be required by clients | no                           |

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

## License
The content of this file is free to edit and distribute,
under the following conditions:
1. Names listed under the _author_ field in this file **MUST NOT** be removed
(but **MAY** be added to).
2. If any part of the content of this file is functionally altered, the
resulting file **MUST** be renamed.
3. This license must be distributed as part of the new file.

## Changelog
### Version 0.1.0

- First draft

# Foreword: Required Reading

The reader is assumed to fully familiar with the functionality provided by the backend server (specification BE01).

Basic functionality of the machine learning component that should be exposed can be found in ML01.

# Foreword: Matching notation

The matching notation used in this specification is identical to that used in BE01.

# Overview

The front end is not required to provide any sort of API endpoint and as such is permitted more freedom of implementation than the backend and machine learning components. These components have also been specified in a such a way that:
    
- The front end can be written entirely in client side html css and javascript (although there MAY be a serverside component should implementers wish).
- The front end can use metadata to store additional information that it may need (namespace rules should be followed).
    
The front end is required to provide an end-user interface that allows them to:

- Manage users
  - Create
  - Login
  - Delete
  - Update (set privilleges)
  - Change passwords
- Manage projects
  - Create
  - Delete
  - Manage grants
- Access project files
  - Perform basic file operations
    - Upload
    - Move
    - Copy
    - Delete
    - Create directories
    - List / "move into" directories
    - Delete directories
- Provide file viewers
  - For files supporting the "tabular" view
  - For files supproting the "scalable_image" view
    - Including managing annotations
  - For report files (specified below)
  - Handle bundle directories correctly (specified below)
- Manage ML jobs
  - Provide listing of possible jobs
  - Present an interface to aquire the required paramters for a job from the end-user.
  - List job status / allow cancellation
  
Optionally they may provide

- Access to read and set the "properties" (see BE01) of
  - The server
  - Users
  - Projects

# Requirement: Bundles

Multiple files will often need to be handled as a single "unit" from the end-users perspective. To this end the namespace "bundle" is used to signal this to the front end. When present in the metadata of directory files it should match

```javascript
{
    "version": integer,
    "namespaces": {
        "bundle": {
            "main_file": string
        }
    }
}
```

where "main_file" gives the sub-path (without a leading "/") of the file **within** the directory that **MUST** be opened when the user attempts to perform a normal "access" (be that by clicking the entry or some other means). When displayed in the UI the end-user **SHOULD NOT** be able to enter the directory by normal means (however there **MAY** be a secondary option to do so - this is recommended). It is highly recommend that the end-user is made aware that the file is actually a directory acting as a bundle by way of a special icon or some other means.

Normal operations such as move, copy and delete are available as normal. If the interface allows entering the bundle then it **MAY** issue a warning to user before they delete a sub-file of the bundle.

# Requirement: Report files

The interface should support displaying of so-called "report files" identified by the extension ".report". These files contain a description of elements that should appear in the report and hints for rendering the interface.

## Foreword: file references

File references inside a report are either given to a path or id. It is highly recommended that paths are used.

Paths within a report file can either be relative or absolute. absolute paths start with a "/" character. relative paths do not. within a relative path the special ".." path component refers to the parent directory. relative components are resolved relative to the directory that contains the report file (For a file that was opened as part of a bundle this is the "real" directory containing the report file, not the directory containing the bundle).

The pattern `file_ref` is given by
```javascript
alternative([
    exactly({
        "id": string
    }),
    exactly({
        "path": string
    })
])
```

## Global structure
The contents of this file are JSON and **MUST** match:
```javascript
{
    "title": string,
    "description": string,
    "created": string,
    
    "blocks": array(block)
}
```
created is an ISO 8601 datetime given in UTC.

The file is composed of zero or more "blocks". At the root level it is reccomended that the blocks be laid out vertically from top to bottom, however, the interface **MAY** chose any layout for the blocks.

The pattern `block` is defined as
```javascript
alternative([ vertical, horizontal, weighted, text, table, plot, image ])
```

## Vertical blocks
A vertical block contains sub-blocks that it reccomends the interface layout from top to bottom. The pattern `verical` is given by
```javascript
{
    "type": "vertical",
    "blocks": array(block)
}
```

## Horizontal blocks
A horizontal block contains sub-blocks that it reccomends the interface layout from left to right.

The pattern `horizontal` is given by
```javascript
{
    "type": "horizontal",
    "blocks": array(block)
}
```

## Weighted blocks
Weighted blocks do not recommended positions for their child blocks, they instead recommend weights which are unit less values that indicate the amount of "prominence" that an element should be given. A rough metric to use could be "the weights are proportional to the horizontal size of the elements". Although no positions are recommended the children will generally be specified in "reading order" the interface should attempt to stick by this.

The pattern `weighted` is given by
```javascript
{
    "type": "weighted",
    "blocks": array({
        "weight": integer,
        "block": block
    })
}
```

## Text blocks
Text blocks give textual information to the end-user there are a number of formats this can take


The pattern `text` is given by
```javascript
{
    "type": "text",
    "id": optional(string),
    
    "title": optional(string),
    "subtitle": optional(string),
    "caption": optional(string),
    
    "paragraphs" : array({
        "contents": array(
            alternative([{
                "type": "html",
                "contents": string
            }, {
                "type": "ref",
                "to": string,
                "text": optional(string)
            }, {
                "type": "file_ref",
                "to": file_ref,
                "text": optional(string)
            }])
        )
    })
}
```
The text element defines a list of paragraphs that should be spaced one after the other with space between them. Within a paragraph there is an array of elements that should be laid-out as normal text (following the rules for "inline" formatting contexts in terms of the CSS box model).

The html element gives html that should be rendered.

The "ref" element inserts a reference (a clickable link) that leads to/highlights the referenced block (searching based on the "id" of the block). If not specified the interface should render the text of this link as something sensible given the target eg "Figure 2". "to" **MUST** refer to another block within the document.

The "file_ref" element inserts a reference (a clickable link) that causes a view of the given file to be opened. If not specified the interface should render the text of this link as something sensible given the target eg the filename.

## Table blocks
Table blocks insert a tablular view of the specified file into the document.

The pattern `table` is given by
```javascript
{
    "type": "table",
    "id": optional(string),
    
    "title": optional(string),
    "sub_title": optional(string),
    "caption": optional(string),
    
    "file": file_ref,
    
    "columns": optional(array(integer)),
    "is_subset_of": optional(file_ref),
    
    "rank_column": optional(integer),
    "max_rows": optional(integer)
}
```

File refers to any file that supports the "tabular" view.

Columns is an array of column indices that should be selected (if not specified all columns are taken - this corresponds to the "cols" paramter of a tabular view - see BE01).

If specified the "is_subset_of" parameter indicates that all rows in the given file are also present in the referenced file, and that the number and format of the columns is the same. This is provided to allow a report to reference a filtered version of some data.

**Matching:** the interface **MAY** choose to link different parts of the document referring to the same row. For example when the end-user highlights a row in a table view the corresponding point on a plot is also highlighted and vice-versa. This can be done be checking only the "file" attributes of the given tables/plots. The attribute "is_subset_of" implies that the interface should treat the rows as if they came from the referenced table whilst determining linked report elements.

"rank_column" gives a column index for a "ranking column". This is a column that contains normalised values in the range 0 to 1. 0 being the worst rank, 1 the best. This could be displayed, for example, by changing the colour of the row or displaying a partially filled bar next to each row. The rank could give, for example, goodness of fit.

"max_rows" gives the maximum number of rows that should be displayed, if the table is longer than this the results should be truncated. The interface should give an option to "load more" in this case.

The interface should provide a means to open the data file associated with the table.

## Plot blocks
Plot blocks insert a plot of one or more datasets

The pattern `plot` is given by
```javascript
{
    "type": "plot",
    "id": optional(string),
    
    "title": optional(string),
    "sub_title": optional(string),
    "caption": optional(string),

    "display_legend": optional(boolean),
    
    "data_series": array({
        "plot_type": alternative(["line", "scatter", "pie"]),
        "legend_name": optional(string),
        
        "file": file_ref,
        "is_subset_of": optional(file_ref),
        
        "x_col": integer,
        "y_col": integer,
        "error_max_col": optional(integer),
        "error_min_col": optional(integer),
    }),
    
    "x_axis": optional({
        "start_hint": optional(number),
        "end_hint": optional(number),
        "label": optional(string)
    }),
    
    "y_axis": optional({
        "start_hint": optional(number),
        "end_hint": optional(number),
        "label": optional(string)
    })
}
```
File refers to any file that supports the "tabular" view.

When a pie chart is specified it should be the only series and the axis values are ignored. In this case x_col refers to the category and y_col referes to the value (should be a number).

"error_max_col" and "error_min_col" optionally give the bounds of error bars that should be displayed.

The bounds for the axis may be ignored.

## Image blocks
Image blocks insert an images - images can either be in png or svg format.

The pattern `image` is given by
```javascript
{
    "type": "image",
    "id": optional(string),

    "title": optional(string),
    "sub_title": optional(string),
    "caption": optional(string),

    "file": file_ref,
    "file_type": alternative(["png", "svg"])
}
```

If possible svg images should be embedded (so that interactive elements work).

# Notes for implementors
## Image Annotations
Annotations may be stored in any format:

- Using file metadata
  - Probably the best approach, removes the possiblity of corruption due to races
  - Gets deleted alongside the file
- Using seperate files
  - More care needs to be take to avoid races
  - Could package the image and annotation file in a "bundle" as above, so that deletion is syncronised.
- Using a seperate server
  - Could provide a notifications service (over websockets or similar) to allow simultaneous editors with all views kept in sync.
  
The suggested method is using metadata, (a notifcations server would be a valuable addition however).
